---
title: Thinking about History, Digital Media, and Narrative
date: 2014-11-01
author: Jennifer Farman
layout: post
---

For this weeks blog post, I looked at the two NYT projects - both of which I found to be amazing works of digital journalism that really take advantage of the digital medium. Sometimes efforts to use creative formats in journalism add little to the piece, but I think in both of these cases the format added a lot to my experience as a reader.

To start off my response to the discussion topic, I would like to respond to Paul's comment that "interactivity seems to leave us in danger of incoherency." Paul notes that "We let our readers explore a world that we’ve created for them, but we don’t give them a map." I think that there is a definite disadvantage to leaving readers with little direction when it comes to digital history projects (especially those utilizing non-linear or other non-traditional formats). If a user/reader can't figure out how to navigate a website, they will leave it quickly, and if they do decide to stick around they aren't likely to glean much insight from the project.

However, I do think there is a value in giving users space to engage with a project on their own terms. I think in our discussion of digital history projects in this course we have often focused too narrowly on these projects in the realm of academia. One amazing aspect of digital history is that the format makes it more likely that non-academic users will engage with historical analysis. If someone is engaging with your project and learning something new, is it of grave concern whether they properly understood your thesis? We definitely don't want users to draw incorrect conclusions, but does there always have to be a definite thesis at the center of a digital history project? In the reading on Visualizations and Historical Arguments, John Theibault notes: "Readers can customize the presentation of data to isolate issues of particular interest to them, rather than depending on the author to frame the question being answered. Interactive engagement with a visualization is yet another innovation made possible by digitization." I think this observation supports the notion that there is a definite value to giving users flexibility when it comes to engaging with digital history.

To respond to the questions posed in the prompt, I would say yes: hypertext or interactivity can help us more effectively communicate the past. These features help organize information in a way that reflects the non-linear narratives of many historical projects. These features also play to the strengths of users by making use of layouts common to the internet. For example, imagine an archive of correspondences from the Republic of Letters set up like Twitter - where you could see how different users interacted with each other and see each letter as a response / reply to other letters. Key themes and ideas would be represented as twitter Hashtags, and the archive could take advantage of user and hashtag hyperlinking, as well as response threading. If a letter was forwarded from its recipient to another person, this could be represented as a retweet. Now imagine an archive of these letters organized simply by date. Certainly the former would be way more insightful (and fun) to look through. And the organization would give a better sense for the "feel" of the Republic of Letters as a social and informational network. When was "revolution" as trending? When was "electricity" trending? Who did Benjamin Franklin retweet?
Anyways I may have gone off on a tangent here, but I think this example emphasizes what I think are the two key aspects of features like hypertext or interactivity: (1) they give flexibility and nuance in the presentation of historical narrative that don't fit neatly into a linear structure and (2) they allow users to navigate these projects in the same manner they navigate the internet and can take advantage of this familiarity. I'm definitely looking forward to discussing this issues further in class on Monday!
