---
title: 2014-09-28-Grubert-Week-2-readings
date: 2014-09-28
author: Grubert
layout: post
---
I spent some time in both the Online Archive of California and the William F. Cody Archive, and the most striking thoughts I had deal with standardization and replicability.

To start with a strong disclaimer, I am a nonhistorian — specifically, I am a nonhistorian trained in disciplines that cultivate a sense that our research and conclusions are objective, that research and conclusions are replicable, and that there are right answers to questions (more specifically, that there are wrong answers to questions, and that the goal is to identify not-wrong answers). Thus, I suspect I am tuned to see a trend towards standardization and replicability, and I am perhaps also tuned to think about the disadvantages of that standardization and replicability. I am trained in environmental engineering and mathematics, and much of my work on environmental decision making, risk prioritization, process safety development, and other decision-oriented tasks has led me to believe that emphasizing a single or small set of methods of evaluating something or making a decision is generally useful (it enhances communication among practitioners, for one, and it makes it easier to catch mistakes that inevitably happen and would potentially lead to one of the wrong answers), but there are times when such standardization can mask problems not considered when developing the central vocabularies and processes or lead to extreme conservatism in design that might not be warranted. 

The point of all that preamble being, I actually don’t know enough about historical research to know whether digital archives exacerbate this issue or not, but I was struck by the potential power of digital curators to strongly influence thought in a discipline that I at least think is philosophically less interested in standardization and avoiding wrong answers than my own.

Specifically with the Online Archive of California, I did not have an especially easy time navigating the archive — this is probably primarily a learning curve issue on my end, but I felt that I was ending up in places where the Archive wanted me to end up. Two clicks deep, I had six options for themes I could explore in the archive and I wasn’t sure how to get back to where I had started without using my back button. So, I kept clicking. The richness of the documents in the archive is impressive, certainly — but I was very interested to see how different documents had been tagged or grouped together in ways that are probably more constraining than might be found in a traditional physical setting (although LoC tagging is essentially the same thing and does lead to an external grouping of documents). I felt less directed through the archive in the William F. Cody archive, which was more clearly navigable (to me!) and seemed to be grouping documents most prominently by type (e.g. “text”) rather than most prominently by curated collections.

So, my immediate reaction was that digital archives might lead to standardization of historical inquiry, if only because the linkages between nonmaterial documents are more closely controlled by the digital archivist than documents might be in a physical setting. But, again, I could be extremely wrong about the degree to which the physical location and cataloguing of documents standardizes thought among historians. Perhaps digital archives merely make the “tagging” more obvious. 

I was also struck by the incredible accessibility of the materials in the Archives — a topic for another post, perhaps, but the ability to allow people to see documents online they might never see in person seems a very powerful motivator for accepting some materiality tradeoffs, particularly when they might not be fundamentally changing the way people approach documents. 
