---
title: 2014-10-04-Grubert-week-3-readings
author: Emily Grubert
format: post
---
I used Palladio to play with some text data associated with a set of journal articles I am investigating, specifically with author, journal, year published, and title as metadata. I was very impressed with Palladio’s mapping functionality (both the geographic and nongeographic maps) — I had not previously had a software tool handle a lot of data quickly and legibly to quite the same extent. To test an actual application, I had Palladio make me a relational map showing how many articles with a specific keyword had been published in each journal by year in an attempt to show the rise of certain journals over time. It worked quite well, but that particular analysis highlighted a couple of challenges associated with using textual data for analysis.

In particular, it is difficult to do statistical work (beyond word frequency counts or other similar types of frequency counts) on text-based data. The questions that can be answered quantitatively are precisely those for which quantifiable data have been generated — whether that means actually inputting numerical metadata like date or location or whether it means adding consistent, equivalent representations of another aspect of inquiry. In my case, this meant something like journal title — an easy-to-quantify (identically every time) and thus easy-to-compute piece of information. But considering textual data as something that expresses a deeper meaning, often nuanced and bound by context and human interpretation, makes it much more difficult to work with in a computational setting. Word frequency analysis in its many forms is a popular type of analysis, in part because it is relatively straightforward both to perform and to explain, but  many questions people working with textual data wish to ask address issues of word order, subtle differences in expression, links between what is written and what is understood by an audience, etc.

Palladio, to my mind, does a great job of visualizing relationships that are articulated by the researcher (mainly as something like column headings), which is a huge service. The ease with which the program renders complicated graphs that would be too difficult to draw by hand in any consistent way also opens up this type of analysis to more questions, as people might see a much lower burden of visualization. Relational maps are a powerful tool that leave quite a bit of the direction and manipulation to the human involved, which is both a strength (particularly versus undirected modeling, as long as a hypothesis is available) and a constraint, as not all analyses can be solved with relational maps. But, as a relational mapping software, Palladio is probably the best I’ve seen. Surmounting issues like computationally performing context-based analyses will come in other softwares. A challenge that the field faces is preserving enough flexibility and user control over a task while still making output relatively easy to obtain and pass along to other workers—something that my brief experience with Palladio suggests that Palladio does well.
