---
title: Week 9 Blog Post
author: Grubert
date: 2014-11-15
layout: post
---
For this last post, I’m going to go all out in claiming my status as a nonhistorian and non-aspiring historian and synthesize my thoughts on digital history from the perspective of someone who cares about history, consumes historians’ outputs, and hopes to use historical insight but is not actively a member of the history community. My most salient takeaway from everything we’ve done this quarter to examine digital history methods and outputs is that the future of digital history seems to depend heavily on how successful the community is at creating incentives for historians to do digital work. From my perspective, it seems clear that certain types of digital projects are obviously useful and encouraged by e.g. funding organizations and departments—most prominently, digital archives seem to be commonly viewed as useful and worthwhile, and they seem to be (relatively) comfortable in their attractiveness to funders. Others—and most notably, those projects that I would be more willing to call digital rather than digitized history—seem to be in a more precarious position. For now, it does not seem that the history community has come to a place yet where digital projects and digitally dependent projects are rewarded. Those who do digital history have done some neat things, and it is very cool to look at the types of projects that are being conceived in digital history, but my sense both from reading the projects and talking to the practitioners in this class is that there’s a bit of fear about going fully towards a digital life as a historian. Many of the more prominent digital history projects seem to be accompanied by books or at least hopes for books, and with good reason—it is not clear that digital projects will enter into the scholarly discourse or (for some, even more pressingly) a job application or tenure case. I think that could change, but it will be tricky to navigate the space between current practice and a future where digital history is valued and, more importantly, actively engaged. Until historians recognize digital projects as valid academic work that is judged more on its ability to reveal historical interpretations and less on its technical wizardry—and in turn, cited, shared, and subject to rebuttals on content rather than form—I think digital history will have a struggle ahead. This potential is made doubly difficult by the sense I have that digital historians still need to produce more traditional academic products (e.g. books), which necessarily limits their time available to dedicate to truly transformative uses of digital tools to examine the past and also likely limits their desire to make radical departure from book-like formats that can more harmoniously be converted into books. So, I think the future of digital history is: more digital archives, more conversation about forms, and either eventual success as a fully credited form of academic work or a more modest future where output is dominated by those who already have tenure or are far enough away from the question that they can afford to innovate.
