---
title: 2014-10-11-Grubert-week-3-discussion
date: 2014-10-11
author: Emily Grubert
layout: post
---
I compared two “corpora” that each comprised a single journal article addressing the impacts of unconventional natural gas extraction in a Commonwealth country. One addresses environmental impacts of shale gas development in the UK with a life cycle assessment, while the other addresses stakeholder values in a citizen group opposing coal seam gas extraction in Australia. The articles (published in different Elsevier journals) were first submitted within 8 days of each other, then published about 8 months later within 3 days of each other, indicating that while the field, research question, and particular location of the research in either case might be quite different, the science and methods available to each author group are quite consistent. These texts are questionably historical documents since they were both published quite recently (late 2014), though they are based on inventories of information from earlier and likely will become historical texts in time—I chose to use them because they represent a snapshot of peer-reviewed, thorough research on environmental issues versus social issues regarding roughly the same thing at roughly the same time. 

Unsurprisingly, the two texts have quite different focuses—given the goal here of testing out Voyant, I wanted to look at texts with differences that I could intuit and verify against my read. Even though the differences I expected (mainly an emphasis on environment words versus people words in the two texts) were present, the Voyant “difference” results were enlightening and useful in their quantification of the differences between the texts. For example, I expected the socially oriented paper to focus more on “values” than the environmentally oriented paper (despite the fact that life cycle assessment inherently involves environmental values!), but I was surprised to see that “values” was the most distinguishing word between the two texts—at a difference value of -9.3 from the environmental paper to the social paper, versus the second-most distinguishing phrase of “et al” at about -3.0 or the third of “social” at -2.0. Indeed, seeing that “values” was more distinguishing that “social” was an interesting insight. Also, the fact that the “social” paper used the word “environmental” significantly more often than the “environmental” paper was pretty surprising. On the other end, words very specific to the topic at hand were most distinguishing for the environmental paper on shale gas in the UK (e.g. “gas,” “shale,” and “uk”), and other common LCA-type words (“electricity,” “water”) were also more frequently used in the environmental paper.


Voyant is an easy-to-use tool that provides fast information that is valuable for analysis, if easy to overspecify and potentially easy to read too much significance into. I will need to use the tool more to see whether I find Voyant as useful when I do not have a clear sense of “the answer” when I start a comparison. I think a next step might be to feed in larger corpora (e.g. all engineering papers vs all social science papers on natural gas development published in 2014) or differently organized corpora (e.g. all papers on a topic from a given university versus another) to see how the tool performs.


Insights likely come largely from quick ability to visualize and reanalyze documents. Some limitations likely include challenges in framing document corpora and choosing research questions that are answerable and not too user-guided in producing conclusions.
