---
title: Final Blog Post
author: Jennifer Farman
date: 2014-11-17
layout: post
---
The discussions in this course have done a great job covering both the benefits and pitfalls of digital history. We have been lucky to have those with perspectives grounded in traditional academia, and those whose academic work is focused on evolving digital technologies. I think this balance has allowed for a nuanced discussion of the ways digital tools can benefit historians as well as a discussion of these tools' limitations. We have discussed the ways in which improper use of digital tools can be distracting or, in the worst case, misleading. One important takeaway from this course has been: just because a tool exists, doesn't necessarily mean that it should be used. At the same time, we have seen a myriad of ways in which digital tools can bring forth fascinating content and nuanced historical arguments.

As a student of computer science, I am thrilled at the possibilities for digital history in the future. I think advancements in computer vision will bring forth exciting new possibilities for analysis of historical photographs / visual art, which will allow historians to use images as historical documents in new ways. I also believe that advancements in natural language processing (NLP) ail give historians even more powerful tools for things like text analysis and topic modeling. These tools will benefit historians in two ways: 1) they will save historians time and effort when it comes to finding relevant historical documents and 2) they will allow historians to make new arguments about texts and their relationships to one another.

I think the discussions on the pitfalls of digital history have been somewhat off the mark, since they often focus too much on the argument or thesis of the project. If an academic digital history project is missing a strong thesis or focus, that is an issue with the author of the work, and not a shortcoming of the tools used to create the work. Furthermore I do not believe that more powerful digital tools will take the place of the historian or necessarily lead them to lazy analysis. The data produced by digital tools will always need the analysis of a historian in order to take shape and become a historical argument.

Finally, I think there is one final point that hasn't been discussed that is relevant to our overall discussion of digital history. We have mainly focused on the ramifications of digital history in academia, and have somewhat ignored its utility as a teaching tool for broader reaching educational platforms. I think it is important to keep in mind the fact that digital history projects are generally more public facing and widely accessible than traditional history publications. There is great potential for the use of digital history as a teaching tool in middle and high school education, especially given the interactive nature of many projects. I also think that digital history emphasizes that looking at the past is an ongoing and interpretive process, a perspective which is often missing from pre-university approaches to history.

To conclude, I just wanted to say how much I enjoyed the spirited nature of the discussions in this class. I am really looking forward to checking out everyone's projects when we get back from break!
