---
title: 2014-11-02-Grubert-week-7-readings
author: Grubert
date: 2014-11-02
layout: post
---
Born digital documents enable better access to creation of nonlinear narratives, but I found myself wondering after this week’s readings whether the best way to take advantage of new (perhaps nonlinear) narrative forms to explain and explore the past is to make projects that are more linear than many of the DH projects we’ve examined in class. I spent a large amount of time with Enchanting the Desert and found that ultimately, I felt undirected. The project is very interesting, and I feel like I learned a lot, but it definitely did not feel as though I was being taken through a narrative bound to the pictures and geography that are the focus of the project. I looked at one picture, then read an essay, then repeated. I think the stated issue with the original slide show that the transitions between slides were too abrupt and did not allow for contextualization still applied in this case as it exists now, at least. 

Contrast that with Snow Fall, the NYT datagraphic that we also looked at this week. Clearly the two projects have very different aims, subjects, access to material, etc., but I was struck by the comparison between the two projects. In particular, I thought that Snow Fall did two things very well that I think DH practitioners could usefully adopt more clearly: first, it maintained control of the reader (even while allowing for some straying, as with portions where readers can click through a slide show about a given person or choose to watch a video or not), and second, it integrated the visualizations with the text. The control point I think is fairly critical and was touched on in some of our other readings as well—digital projects make it easy to want to allow one’s data / capta to stand on its own and present the “clear” argument to the reader, but such an approach is much more difficult for the reader and does not generally lead to people coming away feeling convinced of something, I think. To make a crass comparison, I think that projects like Snow Fall are organized a bit more like IKEA—you walk along a predetermined path, and while it’s ok to stop and browse along the way, you are always on the chosen road and you must return to the road to get out. On the other hand, projects like Gilded City and Enchanting the Desert are more like a conventional store where you go through curated aisles and thus do not have full control over your destiny, but not everyone will come out with the same things, and going in without a list can be overwhelming. I think there remains a large difference between a guided tour of supporting evidence—essentially a narrative that has been supplemented with access to documents at key times and with lots of metadata—and an archive-like project with supporting analysis that does not form a unidirectional narrative. I can see why someone would choose either, but as a reader (and not a scholar in a given area), I prefer the narrative with supplement. As Theibault writes about visualizations, “Instead of working as a driver of narrative, many of the tables and graphs produced in quantitative works of the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s sat inert on the page, functioning more like the biographical pictures included in early historical works than as an integral part of the argument” — I think this issue has not quite been overcome. Tying in visualizations more closely with the text enables more effective communication, but a “bag of data” approach does not.
