---
title: Grubert-2014-10-25-week-5-discussion
author: Grubert
date: 2014-10-25
layout: post
---
The paths toward useful application of network analysis for visualizing relationships among historical figures seem to be many, and I suspect many people will be using tools like Gephi to map out these relationships.  A topic that really interests me is examining social networks among authors. There are a few places that authorship networks could be particularly interesting: academic authorship and authorship of particularly relevant historical documents stand out. On the academic authorship side, something I would like to investigate in my own work is how the questions scholars pose are influenced by their institutional peers. Social networks looking at multiple levels of relationship, including institution broadly defined (e.g. how have Stanford-affiliated workers treated questions about a topic) and individuals with institutional heredity (e.g. does the advisor’s institution result in echoes of scholarship for his or her students.) In particular, focusing on my work on environmental decision making, I am curious whether the tone of academic questions varies in a predictable way from institution to institution. Are the “objective” questions that engineers pose actually objective, or are they strongly influenced by the culture of the institution where people work, or something else?
Another way this network analysis of authorship could be applied is to teasing out information about power centers of the past. That is, is it true that people who are considered powerful (as culture makers, law makers, money makers, what have you) often know each other and influence each other’s thoughts? It would be interesting to see if any sort of rigorous assessment about why certain topics were popular or excluded based on the social background of people who strongly influenced public opinion. There are some pretty interesting examples of tightly knit opinion-makers through history, and I wonder whether SNA could enhance analysis in that area (maybe it already has?).
With respect to Gephi, I think it is a cool tool—I am curious to talk in class about how to automate the process of creating edge tables, though. I tried using some of my own data and then quickly realized the tutorial provided the most time-consuming step—and I cannot imagine people are making as complicated of graphs as I’ve seen while doing all of their edge tables manually. As with many of the digital tools we have used and discussed, I don’t think Gephi can provide analysis on its own, but it does seem to be a great way to support arguments and even to identify where an argument might be waiting. Also like our other tools, I suspect that choosing which information to deem “node” and which to deem “edge” will influence results quite a bit. For example, the example files in the Gephi tutorial probably would have created far different graphs if the edges linked up people by gender rather than whatever it was that the edges were linking.
